blog: Batch Jobs for SparkClient (#207)
kubeflow/blog: _posts/2026-07-25-sparkclient-batch-jobs.md

---
toc: true
layout: post
comments: true
hide: false
title: "Batch Jobs for SparkClient: Submitting and Managing Spark Workloads from Python"
description: How the SparkClient SDK's new batch job APIs work under the hood — submit_job(), FileJob/FuncJob, the lifecycle APIs, and log retrieval.
categories: [gsoc, spark, kubernetes]
author: "Sameer Yadav"
---

As part of GSoC 2026, we've been extending **SparkClient** (KEP-107) — the Kubeflow SDK's Python interface for running Spark on Kubernetes — with support for batch job submission and lifecycle management. Previously, SparkClient covered interactive workloads well via `connect()`, but running a batch job (the "submit a script, walk away, come back to results" kind of work that powers ETL pipelines and scheduled data prep) meant working with the `SparkApplication` CRD directly.

This post walks through how the new `submit_job()` API and its accompanying lifecycle APIs work, what's happening on the cluster when you call them, and where the current implementation draws its boundaries.

## Why this matters in practice

> Before this work, running a Spark batch job on Kubernetes meant hand-writing a `SparkApplication` manifest — getting `spec.mainApplicationFile`, driver and executor resource blocks, and volume mounts right by hand, then applying and debugging it with `kubectl`. That's a reasonable ask for someone who already knows Kubernetes deeply. It's a real barrier for the people who actually write the Spark logic day to day.

Reviewer: Not sure if this paragraph is needed - may be we can write around -  difficulty of running spark job when there is no infra team available to support and managed spark cluster.

Two groups feel this gap most directly:

- **Data engineers** running scheduled ETL pipelines want to submit a job, wait for it, check its status, and pull logs when something breaks — all from the same Python tooling they use for everything else, without switching context to `kubectl` or hand-editing YAML.
- **ML engineers and data scientists** doing feature engineering or training-data prep often don't want to manage a standalone script at all — they want to hand a Python function straight to the cluster and get results back.

`submit_job()` is built for exactly this split — `FileJob` for the first case, `FuncJob` for the second — with the same predictable lifecycle underneath either way. The practical payoff is that integrating a Spark step into a larger Kubeflow pipeline, a CI job, or a scheduled workflow becomes a normal Python function call instead of a small infrastructure project. That's the difference between Spark-on-Kubernetes being accessible only to platform teams and it being usable directly by the people whose actual job is the data, not the cluster.

> 

Reviewer: May be here we can write quick start section and some examples to run directly from the repo itself : https://github.com/kubeflow/sdk/tree/main/examples/spark 

Then later section talking more details on how to use.

 
## Quick start
 
If you'd rather run something than read about it first, the [`examples/spark`](https://github.com/kubeflow/sdk/tree/main/examples/spark) directory in the `kubeflow/sdk` repo has runnable scripts covering everything in this post:
 
- `batch_job_lifecycle.py` — submits `spark_job.py` as a `FileJob`, then walks through waiting, checking status, pulling logs, and cleanup
- `batch_func_job_lifecycle.py` — the same lifecycle, with a `FuncJob` instead
- `batch_failed_job.py` — what a failure looks like end to end
- `spark_job.py` — the minimal PySpark script the lifecycle examples actually submit and run
Clone the repo and run any of them directly against a cluster with the Spark Operator installed. The rest of this post walks through what those scripts are actually doing under the hood.

## Two ways to submit a job

`submit_job()` accepts either a **FileJob** or a **FuncJob**, and builds a `SparkApplication` spec from whichever one you pass in.

![Two doors into the batch pipeline — FileJob vs FuncJob](/images/2026-07-25-sparkclient-batch-jobs/two_jobs.png)

A `FileJob` points at an existing script:

> ```python
> from kubeflow.spark.types import FileJob
> 

Reviewer 2: I think we'd want to present the public API here: https://github.com/kubeflow/sdk/blob/main/kubeflow/spark/types/__init__.py#L15.

```suggestion
```python
from kubeflow.spark import FileJob

```

job = FileJob(
    file_source="s3a://my-bucket/jobs/etl.py",
    args=["--date", "2026-07-25"],
)

> ```

Reviewer 2: If we want to make `s3a://` the flagship example then ideally we'd want to ship [example notebooks](https://github.com/kubeflow/sdk/issues/595) for filesystem URIs before the blog is posted.

There are very likely package dependencies that may not have been integrated into the SDK for the filesystem URI so it remains an untested path.

Otherwise we could always replace with `https://` which has a working example.

Author: Makes sense. I'll switch the example to https:// for now since that's already covered by a working example, and we can showcase s3a:// once we have example notebooks for filesystem URIs.

> `file_source` only auto-resolves for **remote** URIs — `s3a://`, `gs://`, `hdfs://`, `https://`. For a `local://` path, the SDK does not package or upload anything on your behalf; the file needs to already be available inside the driver pod, via a mounted PVC or a pre-built image. `FileJob` describes where the file lives, not how it gets there.

Reviewer 2: I am wondering what you mean by `file_source` auto-resolution here.

Technically speaking the SDK never really resolves the URI scheme - it simply passes through the URI scheme to the server-side runtime. The actual scheme resolution occurs natively within upstream Spark.

```suggestion
```

Author: . I meant that the Spark runtime resolves the URI, not the SDK. I'll update the wording to make that distinction clear😊

A `FuncJob` takes a Python function instead of a file:

> ```python
> from kubeflow.spark.types import FuncJob
> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```python
from kubeflow.spark import FuncJob

```

def transform():
    # your Spark logic here
    ...

job = FuncJob(func=transform)
```

> The function has to be a plain, top-level function defined in an importable `.py` module — the SDK reads its source directly via `inspect.getsource()` to serialize it, which means lambdas, decorated functions, async functions, and anything defined interactively (a REPL or notebook cell) aren't supported. If you're prototyping in a notebook, the function still needs to live in a module you import from, not be defined inline in a cell.

Reviewer 2: The fact that the function must be self-contained with imports inside the body is an important point to mention.

For a `FuncJob`, the SDK serializes the function into a generated script, writes it to a shared `emptyDir` volume through an init container, and points the driver at the generated file instead of a script you had to author yourself. This is the one case where the SDK does the packaging step for you.

Once a job is submitted, both types converge on the same shape — a name, a namespace, a status, a driver pod, some executors — so every lifecycle call downstream treats a `FileJob` and a `FuncJob` identically.

## What happens when you call submit_job()

`submit_job()` doesn't run the job — it hands off a request and returns as soon as the request is accepted:

![What happens under the hood when submit_job() is called](/images/2026-07-25-sparkclient-batch-jobs/architecture.png)

1. **SparkClient validates and builds a spec.** Your `FileJob` or `FuncJob` gets translated into a `SparkApplication` custom resource.
2. **The Kubernetes API stores it.** At this point nothing is running yet — the resource exists, but nobody's acted on it.

> 3. **The Spark Operator notices.** It watches for `SparkApplication` resources cluster-wide and reacts as soon as a new one appears.

Reviewer 2: `cluster-wide` is not fully accurate. The Spark Operator watches cluster-wide only if no explicit namespaces or namespace selectors are specified: https://github.com/kubeflow/spark-operator/blob/master/charts/spark-operator-chart/values.yaml#L510-L522.

```suggestion
3. **The Spark Operator notices.** It watches for `SparkApplication` resources in the namespaces it was configured for and reacts as soon as a new one appears.
```

4. **A driver pod starts.** For a `FuncJob`, an init container writes the serialized function to a volume first; for a `FileJob`, the driver points straight at the referenced script.
5. **The driver fans out to executors**, however many were requested.

`submit_job()` returns once step 2 completes — it doesn't block on job completion. That's what the lifecycle APIs are for.

## Configuring a job with spark_conf and options

Beyond the job definition itself, `submit_job()` takes `spark_conf` for Spark-level tuning and `options` for Kubernetes-level configuration.

`spark_conf` maps straight to Spark configuration properties:

```python
client.submit_job(

>     job=FileJob(
>         file_source="s3://bucket/job.py",
>     ),

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    job=FileJob(
        file_source="s3a://bucket/job.py",
    ),
```

    spark_conf={
        "spark.sql.adaptive.enabled": "true",
        "spark.sql.shuffle.partitions": "200",
    },
)
```

`options` covers the Kubernetes-native pieces that don't belong in Spark config — labels, annotations, node placement, and job naming — as a list of typed option objects:

```python
from kubeflow.spark import (
    Annotations,
    FileJob,
    Labels,
    Name,
    NodeSelector,
    SparkClient,
    Toleration,
)

> 

Reviewer 2: Probably good to import `uuid` here.

> client.submit_job(
>     job=FileJob(
>         file_source="s3://bucket/job.py",
>     ),

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
client.submit_job(
    job=FileJob(
        file_source="s3a://bucket/job.py",
    ),
```

    options=[
        Name(f"batch-job-options-{uuid.uuid4().hex[:8]}"),
        Labels({"app": "spark", "team": "ml"}),
        Annotations({"owner": "kubeflow", "environment": "dev"}),
        NodeSelector({"kubernetes.io/os": "linux"}),
        Toleration(
            key="dedicated",
            operator="Equal",
            value="spark",
            effect="NoSchedule",
        ),
    ],
)
```

Both are optional — the earlier examples in this post work fine without either — but together they cover the two axes teams usually need to customize: how Spark runs the job, and how Kubernetes schedules and labels it.

## Lifecycle APIs

Once a job is submitted, the same six calls manage it regardless of how it started:

![The six lifecycle checkpoints for any submitted job](/images/2026-07-25-sparkclient-batch-jobs/lifecycle.png)

> ```python

Reviewer 2: Probably good to add the `SparkJobStatus` import here.

---
toc: true
layout: post
comments: true
hide: false
title: "Batch Jobs for SparkClient: Submitting and Managing Spark Workloads from Python"
description: How the SparkClient SDK's new batch job APIs work under the hood — submit_job(), FileJob/FuncJob, the lifecycle APIs, and log retrieval.

> categories: [gsoc, spark, kubernetes]

Reviewer 3: Most posts set an explicit `permalink`, and other SDK posts use the `sdk` category (`kubernetes` isn't used elsewhere in `_posts`):

```suggestion
categories: [gsoc, spark, sdk]
permalink: /sdk/spark-batch-jobs/
```

author: "Sameer Yadav"
---

> As part of GSoC 2026, we've been extending **SparkClient** (KEP-107) — the Kubeflow SDK's Python interface for running Spark on Kubernetes — with support for batch job submission and lifecycle management. Previously, SparkClient covered interactive workloads well via `connect()`, but running a batch job (the "submit a script, walk away, come back to results" kind of work that powers ETL pipelines and scheduled data prep) meant working with the `SparkApplication` CRD directly.

Reviewer 3: Link KEP-107 so readers can jump to the design:

```suggestion
As part of GSoC 2026, we've been extending **SparkClient** ([KEP-107](https://github.com/kubeflow/sdk/blob/main/proposals/107-spark-client/README.md)) — the Kubeflow SDK's Python interface for running Spark on Kubernetes — with support for batch job submission and lifecycle management. Previously, SparkClient covered interactive workloads well via `connect()`, but running a batch job (the "submit a script, walk away, come back to results" kind of work that powers ETL pipelines and scheduled data prep) meant working with the `SparkApplication` CRD directly.
```

This post walks through how the new `submit_job()` API and its accompanying lifecycle APIs work, what's happening on the cluster when you call them, and where the current implementation draws its boundaries.

## Why this matters in practice

Running Spark on Kubernetes usually assumes a platform or infra team is around to stand up and maintain the cluster — the Spark Operator, the `SparkApplication` CRDs, the driver/executor resource tuning. That's a fair assumption at a large org with a dedicated platform team. It's a much bigger ask for a smaller team, or for the data engineer or ML engineer who just needs a job to run and doesn't have that infra support behind them.
 
`submit_job()` is built for exactly that gap — `FileJob` for teams running existing ETL scripts, `FuncJob` for those who'd rather hand over a Python function directly — with the same predictable lifecycle underneath either way. The practical payoff: running a Spark step no longer requires someone dedicated to managing the cluster it runs on.
 
## Quick start
 

> If you'd rather run something than read about it first, the [`examples/spark`](https://github.com/kubeflow/sdk/tree/main/examples/spark) directory in the `kubeflow/sdk` repo has runnable scripts covering everything in this post:
>  
> - `batch_job_lifecycle.py` — submits `spark_job.py` as a `FileJob`, then walks through waiting, checking status, pulling logs, and cleanup
> - `batch_func_job_lifecycle.py` — the same lifecycle, with a `FuncJob` instead
> - `batch_failed_job.py` — what a failure looks like end to end
> - `spark_job.py` — the minimal PySpark script the lifecycle examples actually submit and run
> Clone the repo and run any of them directly against a cluster with the Spark Operator installed. The rest of this post walks through what those scripts are actually doing under the hood.

Reviewer 3: The paragraph after the list needs a blank line before it, otherwise kramdown folds it into the last bullet. Also adds `batch_job_options.py`, which is the example for the options section below:

```suggestion
- `batch_job_lifecycle.py` — submits `spark_job.py` as a `FileJob`, then walks through waiting, checking status, pulling logs, and cleanup
- `batch_func_job_lifecycle.py` — the same lifecycle, with a `FuncJob` instead
- `batch_job_options.py` — the same lifecycle with `options` applied, then verified on the created resource
- `batch_failed_job.py` — what a failure looks like end to end
- `spark_job.py` — the minimal PySpark script the lifecycle examples actually submit and run

Clone the repo and run any of them directly against a cluster with the Spark Operator installed. The rest of this post walks through what those scripts are actually doing under the hood.
```

## Two ways to submit a job

`submit_job()` accepts either a **FileJob** or a **FuncJob**, and builds a `SparkApplication` spec from whichever one you pass in.

![Two doors into the batch pipeline — FileJob vs FuncJob](/images/2026-07-25-sparkclient-batch-jobs/two_jobs.png)

A `FileJob` points at an existing script:

```python
from kubeflow.spark import FileJob

job = FileJob(

>     file_source="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/<repo>/<branch>/spark_job.py",

Reviewer 3: Use the URL the example actually submits (`REMOTE_JOB` in `batch_job_lifecycle.py`) so the snippet is copy-pasteable:

```suggestion
    file_source="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/kubeflow/sdk/main/examples/spark/spark_job.py",
```

    args=["--date", "2026-07-25"],
)
```

> `file_source` can reference both **remote** URIs (such as `s3a://`, `gs://`, `hdfs://`, or `https://`) and `local://` paths. The SDK passes the URI through to the Spark runtime, which is responsible for resolving and accessing it. For a `local://` path, the SDK does not package or upload anything on your behalf; the file must already be available inside the driver pod, for example through a mounted PVC or a pre-built image. `FileJob` describes where the file lives, not how it gets there.

Reviewer 3: A mounted PVC or pre-built image isn't reachable for batch jobs today: `submit_job()` has no image parameter (pinned to `apache/spark:4.0.4`) and `PodTemplateOverride` rejects `SparkApplication`. `spark_conf` volume keys are the only route:

```suggestion
`file_source` can reference both **remote** URIs (such as `s3a://`, `gs://`, `hdfs://`, or `https://`) and `local://` paths. The SDK passes the URI through to the Spark runtime, which is responsible for resolving and accessing it. For a `local://` path, the SDK does not package or upload anything on your behalf — the file must already be available inside the driver pod, for example through a volume mounted with `spark.kubernetes.driver.volumes.*` entries in `spark_conf`. Batch jobs currently run on a fixed `apache/spark` image and don't accept `PodTemplateOverride` (Spark Connect only), so baking the script into a custom image or mounting a PVC through a pod template isn't an option yet. `FileJob` describes where the file lives, not how it gets there.
```

A `FuncJob` takes a Python function instead of a file:

```python
from kubeflow.spark import FuncJob

def transform():
    # your Spark logic here
    ...

job = FuncJob(func=transform)
```

The function has to be a plain, top-level function defined in an importable `.py` module — the SDK reads its source directly via `inspect.getsource()` to serialize it, which means lambdas, decorated functions, async functions, and anything defined interactively (a REPL or notebook cell) aren't supported.

> Since only the function source is serialized, the function should be self-contained. Any required imports should be placed inside the function body so they're available when the generated script is executed.

Reviewer 3: `func_args` is part of the API and the linked `batch_func_job_lifecycle.py` uses it — worth a mention here:

```suggestion
Since only the function source is serialized, the function should be self-contained. Any required imports should be placed inside the function body so they're available when the generated script is executed. Parameters are passed separately via `FuncJob(func=..., func_args={"samples": 10})`, and their values must be JSON-like primitives — strings, numbers, booleans, `None`, and lists or dicts of those.
```

For example:

```python
def transform():
    from pyspark.sql import SparkSession

    spark = SparkSession.builder.getOrCreate()

    # your Spark logic here
    ...
```

If you're prototyping in a notebook, the function still needs to live in a module you import from, not be defined inline in a cell.

For a `FuncJob`, the SDK serializes the function into a generated script, writes it to a shared `emptyDir` volume through an init container, and points the driver at the generated file instead of a script you had to author yourself. This is the one case where the SDK does the packaging step for you.

Once a job is submitted, both types converge on the same shape — a name, a namespace, a status, a driver pod, some executors — so every lifecycle call downstream treats a `FileJob` and a `FuncJob` identically.

## What happens when you call submit_job()

`submit_job()` doesn't run the job — it hands off a request and returns as soon as the request is accepted:

> ![What happens under the hood when submit_job() is called](/images/2026-07-25-sparkclient-batch-jobs/architecture.png)

Reviewer 3: Nit on this diagram: the italic *"the driver hands out the work"* caption overlaps the **Executor 2** box, so both are hard to read at the rendered width. Worth regenerating with the caption above or below the executor row.

`spark_conf` maps straight to Spark configuration properties:

```python
client.submit_job(
    job=FileJob(
        file_source="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/<repo>/<branch>/spark_job.py",
    ),
    spark_conf={
        "spark.sql.adaptive.enabled": "true",
        "spark.sql.shuffle.partitions": "200",
    },
)
```

`options` covers the Kubernetes-native pieces that don't belong in Spark config — labels, annotations, node placement, and job naming — as a list of typed option objects:

```python
import uuid

from kubeflow.spark import (
    Annotations,
    FileJob,
    Labels,
    Name,
    NodeSelector,
    SparkClient,
    Toleration,
)

client.submit_job(
    job=FileJob(
        file_source="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/<repo>/<branch>/spark_job.py",
    ),
    options=[
        Name(f"batch-job-options-{uuid.uuid4().hex[:8]}"),
        Labels({"app": "spark", "team": "ml"}),
        Annotations({"owner": "kubeflow", "environment": "dev"}),
        NodeSelector({"kubernetes.io/os": "linux"}),
        Toleration(
            key="dedicated",
            operator="Equal",
            value="spark",
            effect="NoSchedule",
        ),
    ],
)
```

> Both are optional — the earlier examples in this post work fine without either — but together they cover the two axes teams usually need to customize: how Spark runs the job, and how Kubernetes schedules and labels it.

Reviewer 3: Readers copying the earlier no-config examples will hit these defaults — worth stating, since one 512Mi executor surprises people:

```suggestion
Both are optional — the earlier examples in this post work fine without either — but together they cover the two axes teams usually need to customize: how Spark runs the job, and how Kubernetes schedules and labels it. Worth knowing what you get when you leave them out: one executor, 1 core and 512Mi for both driver and executor, and the `spark-operator-spark` service account. Driver resources aren't configurable through `submit_job()` today, unlike `connect()`, which accepts a `Driver` object.
```

## Lifecycle APIs

> Once a job is submitted, the same six calls manage it regardless of how it started:

Reviewer 3: Off by one: the six in the diagram include `submit_job()` itself, so only five remain after submission.

```suggestion
Submission is the first of six checkpoints; the remaining five manage the job regardless of how it started:
```

![The six lifecycle checkpoints for any submitted job](/images/2026-07-25-sparkclient-batch-jobs/lifecycle.png)

```python
from kubeflow.spark import SparkClient, SparkJobStatus

job_name = client.submit_job(
    job,
    num_executors=3,
    resources_per_executor={"cpu": "2", "memory": "4Gi"},

> )

Reviewer 3: This snippet uses `client` and `job` that were never defined — making it standalone:

```suggestion
from kubeflow.spark import FileJob, SparkClient, SparkJobStatus

client = SparkClient()

job_name = client.submit_job(
    FileJob(
        file_source="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/kubeflow/sdk/main/examples/spark/spark_job.py",
    ),
    num_executors=3,
    resources_per_executor={"cpu": "2", "memory": "4Gi"},
)
```

Also consider renaming `job = client.get_job(job_name)` below — it shadows the `job` passed to `submit_job()`.

final_job = client.wait_for_job_status(
    job_name,
    status={SparkJobStatus.COMPLETED, SparkJobStatus.FAILED},
    timeout=600,
    polling_interval=2,
)

job = client.get_job(job_name)
print(job.status, job.num_executors, job.driver_pod_name)

for j in client.list_jobs(status={SparkJobStatus.RUNNING}):
    print(j.name, j.status)

for line in client.get_job_logs(job_name, follow=True):
    print(line)

client.delete_job(job_name)
```

> `wait_for_job_status()` polls the `SparkApplication`'s status on a timer and returns the resolved `SparkJob` once it reaches one of the target statuses. SDK-level status is a simplified four-state model (`CREATED`, `RUNNING`, `COMPLETED`, `FAILED`) mapped from the underlying `SparkApplication` states, so callers don't need to interpret raw CRD conditions.

Reviewer 3: Two behaviors readers will hit — the early raise is why your example passes both statuses:

```suggestion
`wait_for_job_status()` polls the `SparkApplication`'s status on a timer and returns the resolved `SparkJob` once it reaches one of the target statuses. SDK-level status is a simplified four-state model (`CREATED`, `RUNNING`, `COMPLETED`, `FAILED`) mapped from the underlying `SparkApplication` states, so callers don't need to interpret raw CRD conditions. Two details worth knowing: if the job reaches `FAILED` and `FAILED` isn't in your target set, the call raises `RuntimeError` right away instead of waiting out the timeout — which is why the example above passes both `COMPLETED` and `FAILED` — and any operator state the SDK doesn't recognize is mapped to `FAILED` conservatively.
```

## Log retrieval

`get_job_logs()` reads from the **driver pod only**, via the Kubernetes API, with `follow=True` supported for streaming as new lines are written.

![Where get_job_logs() actually reads from](/images/2026-07-25-sparkclient-batch-jobs/logging.png)

> Executor-level log access isn't wired in yet — the driver is where Spark surfaces stage failures, exceptions, and final job status, so it covers the common debugging path for this first release. Executor logs are a reasonable follow-up, not a blocker for shipping batch support.

Reviewer 3: Add the driver-pod lifetime constraint — `get_job_logs()` raises `RuntimeError` when the driver pod isn't there:

```suggestion
Executor-level log access isn't wired in yet — the driver is where Spark surfaces stage failures, exceptions, and final job status, so it covers the common debugging path for this first release. Executor logs are a reasonable follow-up, not a blocker for shipping batch support. One caveat either way: logs are only readable while the driver pod exists, so `get_job_logs()` raises `RuntimeError` if the driver hasn't started yet or has already been cleaned up — pull them before `delete_job()`.
```

> ---

Reviewer 2: As per offline discussion better to mimic the style of existing diagrams in the blog post - using colors more descriptively and using straight edges on the diagrams.

https://github.com/Goku2099/blog/blob/spark_clent-BLOG/images/2026-04-11-kubeflow-26.03-release/Kubeflow-MCP.png

https://github.com/Goku2099/blog/blob/spark_clent-BLOG/images/2025-11-07-introducing-kubeflow-sdk/kubeflow-sdk.drawio.svg

https://github.com/Goku2099/blog/blob/spark_clent-BLOG/images/2025-11-07-introducing-kubeflow-sdk/user-personas.drawio.svg

https://github.com/Goku2099/blog/blob/spark_clent-BLOG/images/2025-09-06-kubeflow-and-gsoc2025/project6.png

https://github.com/Goku2099/blog/blob/spark_clent-BLOG/images/2025-07-21-introducing-trainer-v2/trainerv2.png

https://github.com/Goku2099/blog/blob/spark_clent-BLOG/images/2025-07-21-introducing-trainer-v2/user-personas.drawio.svg

I'm happy to work with you offline to create the images.

This post walks through how the new `submit_job()` API and its accompanying lifecycle APIs work, what's happening on the cluster when you call them, and where the current implementation draws its boundaries.

## Why this matters in practice

Running Spark on Kubernetes usually assumes a platform or infra team is around to stand up and maintain the cluster — the Spark Operator, the `SparkApplication` CRDs, the driver/executor resource tuning. That's a fair assumption at a large org with a dedicated platform team. It's a much bigger ask for a smaller team, or for the data engineer or ML engineer who just needs a job to run and doesn't have that infra support behind them.
 

> `submit_job()` is built for exactly that gap — `FileJob` for teams running existing ETL scripts, `FuncJob` for those who'd rather hand over a Python function directly — with the same predictable lifecycle underneath either way. The practical payoff: running a Spark step no longer requires someone dedicated to managing the cluster it runs on.

Reviewer 2: Technically you still need a K8s cluster and the Spark Operator installed.

```suggestion
```

 
## Quick start
 
If you'd rather run something than read about it first, the [`examples/spark`](https://github.com/kubeflow/sdk/tree/main/examples/spark) directory in the `kubeflow/sdk` repo has runnable scripts covering everything in this post:
 
- `batch_job_lifecycle.py` — submits `spark_job.py` as a `FileJob`, then walks through waiting, checking status, pulling logs, and cleanup
- `batch_func_job_lifecycle.py` — the same lifecycle, with a `FuncJob` instead
- `batch_job_options.py` — the same lifecycle with `options` applied, then verified on the created resource
- `batch_failed_job.py` — what a failure looks like end to end
- `spark_job.py` — the minimal PySpark script the lifecycle examples actually submit and run

Clone the repo and run any of them directly against a cluster with the Spark Operator installed. The rest of this post walks through what those scripts are actually doing under the hood.

## Two ways to submit a job

> `submit_job()` accepts either a **FileJob** or a **FuncJob**, and builds a `SparkApplication` spec from whichever one you pass in.

Reviewer 2: For consistency with the rest of the post.

```suggestion
`submit_job()` accepts either a `FileJob` or a `FuncJob`, and builds a `SparkApplication` spec from whichever one you pass in.
```

![Two doors into the batch pipeline — FileJob vs FuncJob](/images/2026-07-25-sparkclient-batch-jobs/two_jobs.png)

A `FileJob` points at an existing script:

```python
from kubeflow.spark import FileJob

job = FileJob(
    file_source="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/kubeflow/sdk/main/examples/spark/spark_job.py",
    args=["--date", "2026-07-25"],
)

> ```

Reviewer 2: This file source does not take a date: https://github.com/kubeflow/sdk/blob/main/examples/spark/spark_job.py.

For example:

```python
def transform():
    from pyspark.sql import SparkSession

    spark = SparkSession.builder.getOrCreate()

    # your Spark logic here
    ...
```

If you're prototyping in a notebook, the function still needs to live in a module you import from, not be defined inline in a cell.

For a `FuncJob`, the SDK serializes the function into a generated script, writes it to a shared `emptyDir` volume through an init container, and points the driver at the generated file instead of a script you had to author yourself. This is the one case where the SDK does the packaging step for you.

Once a job is submitted, both types converge on the same shape — a name, a namespace, a status, a driver pod, some executors — so every lifecycle call downstream treats a `FileJob` and a `FuncJob` identically.

> ## What happens when you call submit_job()

Reviewer 2: It's a good idea to put backticks on all instances of identifiers e.g., `submit_job()`.

```python
client.submit_job(
    job=FileJob(
        file_source="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/kubeflow/sdk/main/examples/spark/spark_job.py",
    ),
    spark_conf={
        "spark.sql.adaptive.enabled": "true",
        "spark.sql.shuffle.partitions": "200",
    },
)
```

`options` covers the Kubernetes-native pieces that don't belong in Spark config — labels, annotations, node placement, and job naming — as a list of typed option objects:

```python
import uuid

from kubeflow.spark import (
    Annotations,
    FileJob,
    Labels,
    Name,
    NodeSelector,
    SparkClient,
    Toleration,
)

client.submit_job(
    job=FileJob(
        file_source="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/kubeflow/sdk/main/examples/spark/spark_job.py",
    ),
    options=[
        Name(f"batch-job-options-{uuid.uuid4().hex[:8]}"),
        Labels({"app": "spark", "team": "ml"}),
        Annotations({"owner": "kubeflow", "environment": "dev"}),
        NodeSelector({"kubernetes.io/os": "linux"}),
        Toleration(
            key="dedicated",
            operator="Equal",
            value="spark",
            effect="NoSchedule",
        ),
    ],
)
```

> Both are optional — the earlier examples in this post work fine without either — but together they cover the two axes teams usually need to customize: how Spark runs the job, and how Kubernetes schedules and labels it. Worth knowing what you get when you leave them out: one executor, 1 core and 512Mi for both driver and executor, and the `spark-operator-spark` service account. Driver resources aren't configurable through `submit_job()` today, unlike `connect()`, which accepts a `Driver` object.

Reviewer 2: The `connect` API also receives an `Executor` object that the `submit_job` API does not.

## Lifecycle APIs

Submission is the first of six checkpoints; the remaining five manage the job regardless of how it started:

![The six lifecycle checkpoints for any submitted job](/images/2026-07-25-sparkclient-batch-jobs/lifecycle.png)

```python
from kubeflow.spark import FileJob, SparkClient, SparkJobStatus

client = SparkClient()

job_name = client.submit_job(
    FileJob(
        file_source="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/kubeflow/sdk/main/examples/spark/spark_job.py",
    ),
    num_executors=3,
    resources_per_executor={"cpu": "2", "memory": "4Gi"},
)

final_job = client.wait_for_job_status(
    job_name,
    status={SparkJobStatus.COMPLETED, SparkJobStatus.FAILED},
    timeout=600,
    polling_interval=2,
)

job = client.get_job(job_name)

> print(job.status, job.num_executors, job.driver_pod_name)

Reviewer 2: Since `final_job` already returns the job do we need to run a `get_job` query?

Author: I wanted this example to demonstrate all of the lifecycle APIs. I changed it so wait_for_job_status() is used only for waiting, and get_job() is then used explicitly to retrieve the job details, avoiding the redundant use of the returned object.

for j in client.list_jobs(status={SparkJobStatus.RUNNING}):

>     print(j.name, j.status)

Reviewer 2: Why would we want to list jobs if the job has already completed above?

Author: I'll restructure the example so list_jobs() is shown before waiting for completion, making the flow more natural.

for line in client.get_job_logs(job_name, follow=True):
    print(line)

client.delete_job(job_name)

> ```

Reviewer 2: Would it be better to illustrate the common lifecycle APIs by following how Trainer documents the common [patterns](https://github.com/kubeflow/sdk/blob/main/docs/source/train/index.rst?plain=1#L85-L110)?

Author: That's a good suggestion. I was trying to demonstrate all of the lifecycle APIs in a single flow, but following the Trainer docs' common patterns will make each API's usage clearer. I'll restructure this section accordingly.

## Log retrieval

`get_job_logs()` reads from the **driver pod only**, via the Kubernetes API, with `follow=True` supported for streaming as new lines are written.

![Where get_job_logs() actually reads from](/images/2026-07-25-sparkclient-batch-jobs/logging.png)

Executor-level log access isn't wired in yet — the driver is where Spark surfaces stage failures, exceptions, and final job status, so it covers the common debugging path for this first release. Executor logs are a reasonable follow-up, not a blocker for shipping batch support. One caveat either way: logs are only readable while the driver pod exists, so `get_job_logs()` raises `RuntimeError` if the driver hasn't started yet or has already been cleaned up — pull them before `delete_job()`.

## What's next

> Batch submission and the lifecycle APIs have full unit coverage plus end-to-end suites for both success and failure paths. The next phase of this project focuses on observability — pulling metrics from the Spark REST API (stage progress, executor stats, job duration), structured event tracking, and eventually a Prometheus-compatible export path.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Batch submission and the lifecycle APIs have unit and end-to-end tests for both success and failure paths. The next phase of this project focuses on observability — pulling metrics from the Spark REST API (stage progress, executor stats, job duration), structured event tracking, and eventually a Prometheus-compatible export path.
```

    FileJob,
    Labels,
    Name,
    NodeSelector,
    SparkClient,
    Toleration,
)

client.submit_job(
    job=FileJob(
        file_source="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/kubeflow/sdk/main/examples/spark/spark_job.py",
    ),
    options=[
        Name(f"batch-job-options-{uuid.uuid4().hex[:8]}"),
        Labels({"app": "spark", "team": "ml"}),
        Annotations({"owner": "kubeflow", "environment": "dev"}),
        NodeSelector({"kubernetes.io/os": "linux"}),
        Toleration(
            key="dedicated",
            operator="Equal",
            value="spark",
            effect="NoSchedule",
        ),
    ],
)
```

Both are optional — the earlier examples in this post work fine without either — but together they cover the two axes teams usually need to customize: how Spark runs the job, and how Kubernetes schedules and labels it. Worth knowing what you get when you leave them out: one executor, 1 core and 512Mi for both driver and executor, and the `spark-operator-spark` service account. Driver and executor resources aren't configurable through `submit_job()` today, unlike `connect()`, which accepts both Driver and Executor objects.

## Lifecycle APIs

> Submission is the first of six checkpoints; the remaining five manage the job regardless of how it started:

Reviewer 3: Could you also explain that we make APIs the same between TrainerClient and SparkClient, so users can seamlessly transition from Apache Spark data processing to large scale distributed training with PyTorch.
Like you show table in this page: https://kubeflow-sdk--730.org.readthedocs.build/en/730/spark/lifecycle.html#overview

![The six lifecycle checkpoints for any submitted job](/images/2026-07-25-sparkclient-batch-jobs/lifecycle.png)

### Submit a batch job

```python
from kubeflow.spark import FileJob, SparkClient, SparkJobStatus

client = SparkClient()

job_name = client.submit_job(
    FileJob(
        file_source="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/kubeflow/sdk/main/examples/spark/spark_job.py",
    ),
    num_executors=3,
    resources_per_executor={"cpu": "2", "memory": "4Gi"},
)
```

### Wait for a job to complete

```python
client.wait_for_job_status(
    job_name,
    status={SparkJobStatus.COMPLETED, SparkJobStatus.FAILED},
    timeout=600,
    polling_interval=2,
)
```

### Get job details

```python
job = client.get_job(job_name)
print(job.status, job.num_executors, job.driver_pod_name)
```

### List running jobs

```python
for job in client.list_jobs(status={SparkJobStatus.RUNNING}):
    print(job.name, job.status)

> ```

Reviewer 3: Could you show some samples outputs in your blog for these APIs?

## What's next

Batch submission and the lifecycle APIs have unit and end-to-end tests for both success and failure paths. The next phase of this project focuses on observability — pulling metrics from the Spark REST API (stage progress, executor stats, job duration), structured event tracking, and eventually a Prometheus-compatible export path.

None of this replaces the Spark Operator or reinvents Spark on Kubernetes — SparkClient stays a thin, Kubernetes-native layer on top of it. The goal is narrower and more practical: let the people who actually need to run Spark jobs — data engineers scheduling ETL, ML engineers prepping training data — do it from Python, without first becoming experts in `SparkApplication` YAML.

## Want to Help?
 
The Kubeflow community is always looking for more contributors, testers, and users interested in Spark on Kubernetes and the broader SDK ecosystem. If you'd like to get involved:
 
- Visit the [Kubeflow website](https://www.kubeflow.org/) or [GitHub repositories](https://github.com/kubeflow).

> - Join the [Kubeflow Slack channels](https://www.kubeflow.org/docs/about/community/).

Reviewer 3: Could you also mention:
1. SDK website: https://sdk.kubeflow.org/en/latest/
2. ML Experience and Kubeflow SDK calls: https://docs.google.com/document/d/1jH2WAX2ePxOfI4JuiVK9nPlesDMiyg67xzLwhpR7wTQ/edit?tab=t.0
